---
title: "Novel X"
day: "nov0310"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0310" type="novella" who="dioneo">
 <h1>
  Novel X
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: dioneo]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100001" id="p03100001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Alibech turns hermit, and is taught by Rustico, a monk,
	how the Devil is put in hell. She is afterwards conveyed
	thence, and becomes the wife of Neerbale.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100002" id="p03100002">
    [002]
   </a>
   Dioneo,
   observing that the queen's story, which he had followed
	with the closest attention, was now ended, and that it only remained
	for him to speak, waited not to be bidden, but smilingly thus
	began:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="dioneo">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100003" id="p03100003">
    [003]
   </a>
   Gracious ladies, perchance you have not yet heard how the
	Devil is put in hell; wherefore, without deviating far from the
	topic of which you have discoursed throughout the day, I will tell
	you how 'tis done; it may be the lesson will prove inspiring; besides
	which, you may learn therefrom that, albeit Love prefers the gay
	palace and the dainty chamber to the rude cabin, yet, for all that,
	he may at times manifest his might in wilds matted with forests,
	rugged with alps, and desolate with caverns: whereby it may be
	understood that all things are subject to his sway.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100004" id="p03100004">
   [004]
  </a>
  But--to come to
 my story--I say that in the city of Capsa
  <note>
   Now Gafsa, in Tunis.
  </note>
  in Barbary there was once
 a very rich man, who with other children had a fair and dainty little
 daughter, Alibech by name.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100005" id="p03100005">
   [005]
  </a>
  Now Alibech, not being a Christian,
 and hearing many Christians, that were in the city, speak much in
 praise of the Christian Faith and the service of God, did one day
 inquire of one of them after what fashion it were possible to serve
 God with as few impediments as might be, and was informed that
 they served God best who most completely renounced the world and
 its affairs, like those who had fixed their abode in the wilds of the
 Thebaid desert.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100006" id="p03100006">
   [006]
  </a>
  Whereupon, actuated by no sober predilection, but
  by childish impulse, the girl, who was very simple and about fourteen
 years of age, said never a word more of the matter, but stole away
 on the morrow, and quite alone set out to walk to the Thebaid
 desert; and, by force of resolution, albeit with no small suffering, she
 after some days reached those wilds; where, espying a cabin a great
 way off, she hied her thither, and found a holy man by the door,
 who, marvelling to see her there, asked her what she came there to
 seek.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100007" id="p03100007">
   [007]
  </a>
  She answered that, guided by the spirit of God, she was come
 thither, seeking, if haply she might serve Him, and also find some one
 that might teach her how He ought to be served.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100008" id="p03100008">
   [008]
  </a>
  Marking her
 youth and great beauty, the worthy man, fearing lest, if he suffered
 her to remain with him, he should be ensnared by the Devil, commended
 her good intention, set before her a frugal repast of roots of
 herbs, crab-apples and dates, with a little water to wash them down,
 and said to her:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   My daughter, there is a holy man not far from
 here, who is much better able to teach thee that of which thou art in
 quest than I am; go to him, therefore;
  </q>
  and he shewed her the
 way.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100009" id="p03100009">
   [009]
  </a>
  But when she was come whither she was directed, she met
 with the same answer as before, and so, setting forth again, she came
 at length to the cell of a young hermit, a worthy man and very
 devout--his name Rustico--whom she interrogated as she had the
 others. Rustico, being minded to make severe trial of his constancy,
 did not send her away, as the others had done, but kept her with
 him in his cell, and when night came, made her a little bed of palmleaves;
 whereon he bade her compose herself to sleep.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100010" id="p03100010">
   [010]
  </a>
  Hardly had
 she done so before the solicitations of the flesh joined battle with the
 powers of Rustico's spirit, and he, finding himself left in the lurch
 by the latter, endured not many assaults before he beat a retreat, and
 surrendered at discretion: wherefore he bade adieu to holy meditation
 and prayer and discipline, and fell a musing on the youth and beauty
 of his companion, and also how he might so order his conversation
 with her, that without seeming to her to be a libertine he might yet
 compass that which he craved of her.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100011" id="p03100011">
   [011]
  </a>
  So, probing her by certain
 questions, he discovered that she was as yet entirely without cognizance
 of man, and as simple as she seemed: wherefore he excogitated
 a plan for bringing her to pleasure him under colour of serving God.
 He began by giving her a long lecture on the great enmity that
 subsists between God and the Devil; after which he gave her to
  understand that, God having condemned the Devil to hell, to put
 him there was of all services the most acceptable to God.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100012" id="p03100012">
   [012]
  </a>
  The girl
 asking him how it might be done, Rustico answered:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Thou
 shalt know it in a trice; thou hast but to do that which thou seest me
 do.
  </q>
  Then, having divested himself of his scanty clothing, he threw
 himself stark naked on his knees, as if he would pray; whereby he
 caused the girl, who followed his example, to confront him in the
 same posture.
  <note>
   No apology is needed for leaving, in accordance
 with precedent, the
 subsequent detail untranslated.
  </note>
 </p>
 <p>
  ***The following [13]-[31] are untranslated ***
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100013" id="p03100013">
   [013]
  </a>
  E cos&igrave; stando, essendo Rustico pi&ugrave; che mai nel suo
 disid&eacute;ro acceso per lo vederla cos&igrave; bella, venne la
 resurrezion della
 carne, la quale riguardando Alibech e maravigliatasi, disse:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Rustico, quella che cosa &egrave;, che io ti veggio, che cos&igrave; si
 pigne in
 fuori, e non l' ho io?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100014" id="p03100014">
   [014]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   O figliuola mia,
  </q>
  disse Rustico,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   questo
 &egrave;
 il Diavolo, di che io t' ho parlato: e vedi tu? ora egli mi d&agrave;
 grandissima
 molestia, tanta che io appena la posso sofferire.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100015" id="p03100015">
   [015]
  </a>
  Allora disse la
 giovane:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Oh lodato sia Iddio, ch&egrave; io veggio che io sto meglio
 che non stai tu, ch&egrave; io non ho cotesto Diavolo io.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100016" id="p03100016">
   [016]
  </a>
  Disse Rustico:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Tu di' vero, ma tu hai un' altra cosa che non la ho io, et
 h&aacute;ila in iscambio di questo.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100017" id="p03100017">
   [017]
  </a>
  Disse Alibech:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   O che?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100018" id="p03100018">
   [018]
  </a>
  A cui
 Rustico disse:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Hai il ninferno; e dicoti che io mi credo che
 Iddio t' abbia qui mandata per la salute della anima mia, per ci&ograve;
 che se questo Diavolo pur mi dar&agrave; questa noja, ove tu vogli aver di
 me tanta piet&agrave;, e sofferire che io in inferno il rimetta, tu mi darai
 grandissima consolazione, et a Dio farai grandissimo piacere e
 servigio, se tu per quello fare in queste parti venuta se', che tu di'.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100019" id="p03100019">
   [019]
  </a>
  La giovane di buona fede rispose:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   O padre mio, poscia che ho
 il ninferno, sia pure quando vi piacer&agrave;.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100020" id="p03100020">
   [020]
  </a>
  Disse allora Rustico:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Figliuola mia, benedetta sia tu; andiamo dunque, e rimetti&aacute;mlovi
 s&igrave; che egli poscia mi lasci stare.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100021" id="p03100021">
   [021]
  </a>
  E cos&igrave; detto, menata la
 giovane sopra uno de' loro letticelli, le 'nsegn&ograve; come star si dovesse a
 dovere
 incarcerare quel maledetto da Dio.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100022" id="p03100022">
   [022]
  </a>
  La giovane, che mai pi&ugrave; non
 aveva in inferno messo diavolo alcuno, per la prima volta sent&igrave; un
 poco di noja, per che ella disse a Rustico:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Per certo, padre mio,
 mala cosa dee essere questo Diavolo, e veramente nimico di Dio, ch&egrave;
 ancora al ninferno, non che altrui, duole quando egli v' &egrave; dentro
 rimesso.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100023" id="p03100023">
   [023]
  </a>
  Disse Rustico:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Figliuola, egli non avverr&agrave; sempre
 cos&igrave;.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100024" id="p03100024">
   [024]
  </a>
  E per fare che questo non avvenisse, da sei volte, anzi che di su il
 letticel si movessero, ve 'l rimisero, tanto che per quella volta gli
 trasser s&igrave; la superbia del capo, che egli si stette volentieri in
 pace.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100025" id="p03100025">
   [025]
  </a>
  Ma, ritornatagli poi nel seguente tempo pi&ugrave; volte, e la giovane
 ubbidiente
 sempre a trargliele si disponesse, avvenne che il giuoco le cominci&ograve;
 a piacere, e cominci&ograve; a dire a Rustico:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Ben veggio che il ver
 dicevano que' valentuomini in Capsa, che il servire a Dio era cos&igrave;
 dolce cosa: e per certo io non mi ricordo che mai alcuna altra ne
 facessi, che di tanto diletto e piacer mi fosse, quanto &egrave; il
 rimettere il
 Diavolo in inferno; e per ci&ograve; io giudico ogn' altra persona, che ad
 altro che a servire a Dio attende, essere una bestia.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100026" id="p03100026">
   [026]
  </a>
  Per la qual
 cosa essa spesse volte andava a Rustico, e gli dicea:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Padre mio,
 io son qui venuta per servire a Dio e non per istare oziosa; andiamo
 a rimettere il Diavolo in inferno.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100027" id="p03100027">
   [027]
  </a>
  La qual cosa faccendo, diceva
 ella alcuna volta:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Rustico, io non so perch&egrave; il Diavolo si fugga
 di
 ninferno; ch&egrave; s' egli vi stesse cos&igrave; volentieri come il
 ninferno il
 riceve e tiene, egli non se ne uscirebbe mai.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100028" id="p03100028">
   [028]
  </a>
  Cos&igrave; adunque
 invitando
 spesso la giovane Rustico, et al servigio di Dio confortandolo s&igrave; la
 bambagia del farsetto tratta gli avea, che egli a tal ora sentiva freddo
 che un altro sarebbe sudato; e per ci&ograve; egli incominci&ograve; a dire
 alla
 giovane che il Diavolo non era da gastigare n&egrave; da rimettere in
 inferno,
 se non quando egli per superbia levasse il capo; e
  <q direct="unspecified">
   noi per grazia di
 Dio l'abbiamo s&igrave; sgannato, che egli priega Iddio di starsi in
 pace
  </q>
  : e
 cos&igrave; alquanto impose di silenzio alla giovane.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100029" id="p03100029">
   [029]
  </a>
  La qual, poi che vide
 Rustico non la richiedeva a dovere il Diavolo rimettere in inferno,
 gli disse un giorno:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Rustico, se il Diavolo tuo &egrave; gastigato e
 pi&ugrave; non ti d&agrave; noja, me il mio ninferno non lascia stare: per
 che
 tu farai bene che tu col tuo Diavolo ajuti attutare la rabbia al
 mio ninferno, com' io col mio ninferno ho ajutato a trarre la
 superbia al tuo Diavolo.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100030" id="p03100030">
   [030]
  </a>
  Rustico, che di radici d' erba e d' acqua
 vivea, poteva male rispondere alle poste; e dissele che troppi diavoli
 vorrebbono essere a potere il ninferno attutare, ma che egli ne
 farebbe ci&ograve; che per lui si potesse; c cos&igrave; alcuna volta le
 sodisfaceva,
 ma s&igrave; era di rado che altro non era che gittare una fava in bocca al
 leone: di che la giovane, non parendole tanto servire a Dio quanto
 voleva, mormorava anzi che no.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100031" id="p03100031">
   [031]
  </a>
  However, the case standing thus
 (deficiency of power against superfluity of desire) between Rustico's
 Devil and Alibech's hell, it chanced that a fire broke out in Capsa,
  whereby the house of Alibech's father was burned, and he and all
 his sons and the rest of his household perished; so that Alibech was
 left sole heiress of all his estate.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100032" id="p03100032">
   [032]
  </a>
  And a young gallant, Neerbale by
 name, who by reckless munificence had wasted all his substance,
 having discovered that she was alive, addressed himself to the pursuit
 of her, and, having found her in time to prevent the confiscation of
 her father's estate as an escheat for failure of heirs, took her, much to
 Rustico's relief and against her own will, back to Capsa, and made
 her his wife, and shared with her her vast patrimony.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100033" id="p03100033">
   [033]
  </a>
  But before
 he had lain with her, she was questioned by the ladies of the manner
 in which she had served God in the desert; whereto she answered,
 that she had been wont to serve Him by putting the Devil in hell,
 and that Neerbale had committed a great sin, when he took her out
 of such service.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100034" id="p03100034">
   [034]
  </a>
  The ladies being curious to know how the Devil
 was put in hell, the girl satisfied them, partly by words, partly by
 signs. Whereat they laughed exorbitantly (and still laugh) and said
 to her:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Be not down-hearted, daughter; 'tis done here too;
 Neerbale will know well how to serve God with you in that way.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0310#p03100035" id="p03100035">
   [035]
  </a>
  And so the story passing from mouth to mouth throughout the city,
 it came at last to be a common proverb, that the most acceptable
 service that can be rendered to God is to put the Devil in hell;
 which proverb, having travelled hither across the sea, is still current.
 Wherefore, young ladies, you that have need of the grace of God,
 see to it that you learn how to put the Devil in hell, because 'tis
 mightily pleasing to God, and of great solace to both the parties,
 and much good may thereby be engendered and ensue.
 </p>
</div>