---
title: "Novel X."
day: "nov0110"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0110" type="novella" who="pampinea">
 <h1>
  Novel X.
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: pampinea]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Master Alberto da Bologna honourably puts to shame a
 lady who sought occasion to put him to shame in that
 he was in love with her.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100002">
    [002]
   </a>
   After
   Elisa had done, it only remained for the queen to conclude
	the day's story-telling, and thus with manner debonair did she begin:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="pampinea">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100003">
    [003]
   </a>
   As stars in the serene expanse of heaven, as in spring-time
 flowers in the green pastures, so, honourable damsels, in the hour of
 rare and excellent converse is wit with its bright sallies.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100004">
    [004]
   </a>
   Which,
 being brief, are much more proper for ladies than for men, seeing
 that prolixity of speech, when brevity is possible, is much less allowable
 to them; albeit (shame be to us all and all our generation) few
 ladies or none are left to-day who understand aught that is wittily
 said, or understanding are able to answer it.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100005">
    [005]
   </a>
   For the place of those
 graces of the spirit which distinguished the ladies of the past has now
 been usurped by adornments of the person; and she whose dress is
 most richly and variously and curiously dight, accounts herself more
 worthy to be had in honour, forgetting, that, were one but so to
 array him, an ass would carry a far greater load of finery than any
 of them, and for all that be not a whit the more deserving of honour.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100006">
    [006]
   </a>
   I blush to say this, for in censuring others I condemn myself.
 Tricked out, bedecked, bedizened thus, we are either silent and
 impassive as statues, or, if we answer aught that is said to us, much
 better were it we had held our peace. And we make believe,
 forsooth, that our failure to acquit ourselves in converse with our
 equals of either sex does but proceed from guilelessness; dignifying
 stupidity by the name of modesty, as if no lady could be modest and
 converse with other folk than her maid or laundress or bake-house
   woman; which if Nature had intended, as we feign she did, she would
 have set other limits to our garrulousness.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100007">
    [007]
   </a>
   True it is that in this, as
 in other matters, time and place and person are to be regarded;
 because it sometimes happens that a lady or gentleman thinking by
 some sally of wit to put another to shame, has rather been put to
 shame by that other, having failed duly to estimate their relative
 powers.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100008">
    [008]
   </a>
   Wherefore, that you may be on your guard against such
 error, and, further, that in you be not exemplified the common
 proverb, to wit, that women do ever and on all occasions choose the
 worst, I trust that this last of to-day's stories, which falls to me to
 tell, may serve you as a lesson; that, as you are distinguished from
 others by nobility of nature, so you may also shew yourselves
 separate from them by excellence of manners.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100009">
   [009]
  </a>
  There lived not many years ago, perhaps yet lives, in Bologna, a
 very great physician, so great that the fame of his skill was noised
 abroad throughout almost the entire world.
 </p>
 <p>
  Now Master Alberto (such was his name) was of so noble a
 temper that,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100010">
   [010]
  </a>
  being now nigh upon seventy years of age, and all but
 devoid of natural heat of body, he was yet receptive of the flames of
 love; and having at an assembly seen a very beautiful widow lady,
 Madonna Malgherida de' Ghisolieri, as some say, and being charmed
 with her beyond measure, was, notwithstanding his age, no less
 ardently enamoured than a young man, insomuch that he was not
 well able to sleep at night, unless during the day he had seen the fair
 lady's lovely and delicate features.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100011">
   [011]
  </a>
  Wherefore he began to frequent
 the vicinity of her house, passing to and fro in front of it, now on
 foot now on horseback, as occasion best served.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100012">
   [012]
  </a>
  Which she and many
 other ladies perceiving, made merry together more than once, to see
 a man of his years and discretion in love, as if they deemed that this
 most delightful passion of love were only fit for empty-headed youths,
 and could not in men be either harboured or engendered.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100013">
   [013]
  </a>
  Master Alberto thus continuing to haunt the front of the house, it so
 happened that one feast-day the lady with other ladies was seated
 before her door, and Master Alberto's approach being thus observed
 by them for some time before he arrived, they complotted to receive
 him and shew him honour, and then to rally him on his love;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100014">
   [014]
  </a>
  and so they did, rising with one accord to receive him, bidding him
 welcome, and ushering him into a cool courtyard, where they regaled
  him with the finest wines and comfits; which done, in a tone of
 refined and sprightly banter they asked him how it came about that
 he was enamoured of this fair lady, seeing that she was beloved of
 many a fine gentleman of youth and spirit.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100015">
   [015]
  </a>
  Master Alberto, being
 thus courteously assailed, put a blithe face on it, and answered:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madam, my love for you need surprise none that is conversant
 with such matters, and least of all you that are worthy of it.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100016">
    [016]
   </a>
   And though old men, of course, have lost the strength which love demands
 for its full fruition, yet are they not therefore without the
 good intent and just appreciation of what beseems the accepted lover,
 but indeed understand it far better than young men, by reason that
 they have more experience.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100017">
    [017]
   </a>
   My hope in thus old aspiring to love
 you, who are loved by so many young men, is founded on what I
 have frequently observed of ladies' ways at lunch, when they trifle
 with the lupin and the leek. In the leek no part is good, but the
 head is at any rate not so bad as the rest, and indeed not unpalatable;
 you, however, for the most part, following a depraved taste, hold it in
 your hand and munch the leaves, which are not only of no account
 but actually distasteful.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100018">
    [018]
   </a>
   How am I to know, madam, that in your
 selection of lovers, you are not equally eccentric? In which case I
 should be the man of your choice, and the rest would be cast aside.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100019">
   [019]
  </a>
  Whereto the gentle lady, somewhat shame-stricken, as were also her
 fair friends, thus made answer:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Master Alberto, our presumption
 has received from you a most just and no less courteous reproof; but
 your love is dear to me, as should ever be that of a wise and worthy
 man. And therefore, saving my honour, I am yours, entirely and
 devotedly at your pleasure and command.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0110#p01100020">
   [020]
  </a>
  This speech brought
 Master Alberto to his feet, and the others also rising, he thanked the
 lady for her courtesy, bade her a gay and smiling adieu, and so
 left the house. Thus the lady, not considering on whom she exercised
 her wit, thinking to conquer was conquered herself: against
 which mishap you, if you are discreet, will ever be most strictly on
 your guard.
 </p>
</div>