---
title: "Novel IX"
day: "nov0209"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0209" type="novella" who="filomena">
 <h1>
  Novel IX
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: filomena]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Bernab&ograve; of Genoa, deceived by Ambrogiuolo, loses his
 money and commands his innocent wife to be put
 to death. She escapes, habits herself as a man,
 and serves the Soldan. She discovers the deceiver,
 and brings Bernab&ograve; to Alexandria, where the deceiver
 is punished. She then resumes the garb of a
 woman, and with her husband returns wealthy to
 Genoa.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090002">
    [002]
   </a>
   When
   Elisa had performed her part, and
	brought her touching
	story to a close, Queen Filomena, a damsel no less stately than fair
	of person, and of a surpassingly sweet and smiling mien, having
	composed herself to speak, thus began:
  </p>
  <p>
   <q direct="unspecified">
    Our engagements with Dioneo shall be faithfully observed;
	wherefore, as he and I alone remain to complete the day's narration,
	I will tell my story first, and he shall have the grace he
	craved, and be the last to speak.
   </q>
   After which prelude she thus
	began her story:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="filomena">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090003">
    [003]
   </a>
   'Tis a proverb current among the vulgar that
	the deceived has the better of the deceiver; a proverb which, were it
	not exemplified by events, might hardly in any manner be justified.
	Wherefore, while adhering to our theme, I am minded at the same
	time, dearest ladies, to shew you that there is truth in this proverb;
	the proof whereof should be none the less welcome to you that it
	may put you on your guard against deceivers.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090004">
   [004]
  </a>
  Know then that certain very great merchants of Italy, being met,
 as merchants use, for divers reasons proper to each, at a hostelry in
 Paris, and having one evening jovially supped together, fell a talking
  of divers matters, and so, passing from one topic to another, they
 came at last to discuss the ladies whom they had left at home,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090005">
   [005]
  </a>
  and
 one jocosely said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I cannot answer for my wife; but for myself
 I own, that, whenever a girl that is to my mind comes in my way, I
 give the go-by to the love that I bear my wife, and take my pleasure
 of the new-comer to the best of my power.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090006">
   [006]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   And so do I,
  </q>
  said
 another,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   because I know that, whether I suspect her or no, my wife
 tries her fortune, and so 'tis do as you are done by; the ass and the
 wall are quits.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090007">
   [007]
  </a>
  A third added his testimony to the same effect;
 and in short all seemed to concur in the opinion that the ladies they
 had left behind them were not likely to neglect their opportunities,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090008">
   [008]
  </a>
  when one, a Genoese, Bernab&ograve; Lomellin by name, dissociated
 himself from the rest, affirming that by especial grace of God he was
 blessed with a wife who was, perhaps, the most perfect paragon to be
 found in Italy of all the virtues proper to a lady, ay, and in great
 measure, to a knight or squire; inasmuch as she was fair, still quite
 young, handy, hardy, and clever beyond all other women in
 embroidery work and all other forms of lady's handicraft.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090009">
   [009]
  </a>
  Moreover
 so well-mannered, discreet and sensible was she that she was as fit to
 wait at a lord's table as any squire or manservant or such like, the
 best and most adroit that could be found.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090010">
   [010]
  </a>
  To which encomium he
 added that she knew how to manage a horse, fly a hawk, read, write
 and cast up accounts better than as if she were a merchant; and after
 much more in the same strain of commendation he came at length to
 the topic of their conversation, asseverating with an oath that 'twas
 not possible to find a woman more honest, more chaste than she:
 nay, he verily believed that, if he remained from home for ten years,
 or indeed for the rest of his days, she would never think of any of
 these casual amours with any other man.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090011">
   [011]
  </a>
  Among the merchants who thus gossiped was a young man,
 Ambrogiuolo da Piacenza by name, who, when Bernab&ograve; thus concluded
 his eulogy of his wife, broke out into a mighty laugh, and
 asked him with a leer, whether he of all men had this privilege by
 special patent of the Emperor.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090012">
   [012]
  </a>
  Bernab&ograve; replied, somewhat angrily,
 that 'twas a boon conferred upon him by God, who was rather more
 powerful than the Emperor.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090013">
   [013]
  </a>
  To which Ambrogiuolo rejoined:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I
 make no doubt, Bernab&ograve;, that thou believest that what thou sayst is
 true; but, methinks, thou hast been but a careless observer of the
   nature of things; otherwise, I do not take thee to be of so gross
 understanding but that thou must have discerned therein reasons
 for speaking more judiciously of this matter.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090014">
    [014]
   </a>
   And that thou
 mayst not think that we, who have spoken with much freedom
 about our wives, deem them to be of another nature and mould
 than thine, but mayst know that we have but uttered what
 common sense dictates, I am minded to go a little further into
 this matter with thee.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090015">
    [015]
   </a>
   I have always understood, that of all mortal
 beings created by God man is the most noble, and next after him
 woman: man, then, being, as is universally believed, and is indeed
 apparent by his works, more perfect than woman, must without
 doubt be endowed with more firmness and constancy, women being
 one and all more mobile, for reasons not a few and founded in nature,
 which I might adduce, but mean for the present to pass over.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090016">
    [016]
   </a>
   And
 yet, for all his greater firmness, man cannot withstand--I do not say
 a woman's supplications, but--the mere lust of the eye which she
 unwittingly excites, and that in such sort that he will do all that is in
 his power to induce her to pleasure him, not once, perhaps, in the
 course of a month, but a thousand times a day. How, then, shouldst
 thou expect a woman, mobile by nature, to resist the supplications,
 the flatteries, the gifts, and all the other modes of attack that an
 accomplished seducer will employ? Thou thinkest that she may
 hold out!
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090017">
    [017]
   </a>
   Nay verily, affirm it as thou mayst, I doubt thou dost not
 really so think. Thou dost not deny that thy wife is a woman, a
 creature of flesh and blood like the rest; and if so, she must have the
 same cravings, the same natural propensities as they, and no more
 force to withstand them; wherefore 'tis at least possible, that,
 however honest she be, she will do as others do; and nought that is
 possible admits such peremptory denial or affirmation of its contrary
 as this of thine.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090018">
   [018]
  </a>
  Whereto Bernab&ograve; returned:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I am a merchant and no philosopher,
 and I will give thee a merchant's answer. I acknowledge
 that what thou sayst is true of vain and foolish women who have no
 modesty, but such as are discreet are so sensitive in regard of their
 honour that they become better able to preserve it than men,
 who have no such solicitude; and my wife is one of this sort.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090019">
   [019]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Doubtless,
  </q>
  observed Ambrogiuolo,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   few would be found to indulge
 in these casual amours, if every time they did so a horn grew out on
   the brow to attest the fact; but not only does no horn make its
 appearance but not so much as a trace or vestige of a horn, so only
 they be but prudent; and the shame and dishonour consist only in
 the discovery: wherefore, if they can do it secretly, they do it, or are
 fools to refrain.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090020">
    [020]
   </a>
   Hold it for certain that she alone is chaste who
 either had never suit made to her, or, suing herself, was repulsed.
 And albeit I know that for reasons true and founded in nature this
 must needs be, yet I should not speak so positively thereof as I do,
 had I not many a time with many a woman verified it by experience.
 And I assure thee that, had I but access to this most saintly wife of
 thine, I should confidently expect very soon to have the same success
 with her as with others.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090021">
   [021]
  </a>
  Then Bernab&ograve; angrily:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   'Twere long
 and tedious to continue this discussion. I should have my say, and
 thou thine, and in the end 'twould come to nothing. But, as thou
 sayst that they are all so compliant, and that thou art so accomplished
 a seducer, I give thee this pledge of the honour of my wife: I
 consent to forfeit my head, if thou shouldst succeed in bringing her
 to pleasure thee in such a sort; and shouldst thou fail, thou shalt
 forfeit to me no more than one thousand florins of gold.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090022">
   [022]
  </a>
  Elated by this unexpected offer, Ambrogiuolo replied:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I know
 not what I should do with thy blood, Bernab&ograve;, if I won the wager;
 but, if thou wouldst have proof of what I have told thee, lay five
 thousand florins of gold, which must be worth less to thee than thy
 head, against a thousand of mine, and, whereas thou makest no
 stipulation as to time, I will bind myself to go to Genoa, and within
 three months from my departure hence to have had my pleasure of
 thy wife, and in witness thereof to bring back with me, of the things
 which she prizes most dearly, evidence of her compliance so weighty
 and conclusive that thou thyself shalt admit the fact; nor do I
 require ought of thee but that thou pledge thy faith neither to come
 to Genoa nor to write word to her of this matter during the said
 three months.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090023">
   [023]
  </a>
  Bernab&ograve; professed himself well content; and though
 the rest of the company, seeing that the compact might well have
 very evil consequences, did all that they could to frustrate it, yet the
 two men were now so heated that, against the will of the others, they
 set it down fairly in writing, and signed it each with his own hand.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090024">
   [024]
  </a>
  This done, Ambrogiuolo, leaving Bernab&ograve; at Paris, posted with all
 speed for Genoa. Arrived there, he set to work with great caution;
  and having found out the quarter in which the lady resided, he
 learned in the course of a few days enough about her habits of life
 and her character to know that what Bernab&ograve; had told him was
 rather less than the truth. So, recognising that his enterprise was
 hopeless, he cast about for some device whereby he might cover his
 defeat;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090025">
   [025]
  </a>
  and having got speech of a poor woman, who was much in
 the lady's house, as also in her favour, he bribed her (other means
 failing) to convey him in a chest, which he had had made for the
 purpose, not only into the house but into the bedroom of the lady,
 whom the good woman, following Bernab&ograve;'s instructions, induced to
 take charge of it for some days, during which, she said, she would be
 away.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090026">
   [026]
  </a>
  So the lady suffered the chest to remain in the room; and when
 the night was so far spent that Bernab&ograve; thought she must be asleep,
 he opened it with some tools with which he had provided himself,
 and stole softly out. There was a light in the room, so that he was
 able to form an idea of its situation, to take note of the pictures and
 everything else of consequence that it contained, and to commit the
 whole to memory.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090027">
   [027]
  </a>
  This done, he approached the bed; and observing
 that the lady, and a little girl that was with her, were fast asleep, he
 gently uncovered her, and saw that nude she was not a whit less
 lovely than when dressed: he looked about for some mark that might
 serve him as evidence that he had seen her in this state, but found
 nothing except a mole, which she had under the left breast, and
 which was fringed with a few fair hairs that shone like gold. So
 beautiful was she that he was tempted at the hazard of his life to
 take his place by her side in the bed;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090028">
   [028]
  </a>
  but, remembering what he had
 heard of her inflexible obduracy in such affairs, he did not venture;
 but quietly replaced the bedclothes; and having passed the best part
 of the night very much at his ease in her room, he took from one of
 the lady's boxes a purse, a gown, a ring and a girdle, and with these
 tokens returned to the chest, and locked himself in as before. In
 this manner he passed two nights, nor did the lady in the least
 suspect his presence.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090029">
   [029]
  </a>
  On the third day the good woman came by
 preconcert to fetch her chest, and took it back to the place whence
 she had brought it. So Ambrogiuolo got out, paid her the stipulated
 sum, and hied him back with all speed to Paris, where he arrived
 within the appointed time.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090030">
   [030]
  </a>
  Then, in presence of the merchants
  who were witnesses of his altercation with Bernab&ograve;, and the
 wager
 to which it had given occasion, he told Bernab&ograve; that he had won
 the bet, having done what he had boasted that he would do; and in
 proof thereof he first of all described the appearance of the room and
 the pictures, and then displayed the articles belonging to the lady
 which he had brought away with him, averring that she had given
 them to him.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090031">
   [031]
  </a>
  Bernab&ograve; acknowledged the accuracy of his description
 of the room, and that the articles did really belong to his wife, but
 objected that Ambrogiuolo might have learned characteristic features
 of the room from one of the servants, and have come by the things
 in a similar way, and therefore, unless he had something more to say,
 he could not justly claim to have won the bet.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090032">
   [032]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Verily,
  </q>
  rejoined
 Ambrogiuolo,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   this should suffice; but, as thou requirest that I say
 somewhat further, I will satisfy thee. I say, then, that Madam
 Zinevra, thy wife, has under her left breast a mole of some size,
 around which are, perhaps, six hairs of a golden hue.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090033">
   [033]
  </a>
  As Bernab&ograve;
 heard this, it was as if a knife pierced his heart, so poignant was his
 suffering; and, though no word escaped him, the complete alteration
 of his mien bore unmistakable witness to the truth of Ambrogiuolo's
 words. After a while he said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Gentlemen, 'tis even as Ambrogiuolo
 says; he has won the bet; he has but to come when
 he will, and he shall be paid.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090034">
   [034]
  </a>
  And so the very next day
 Ambrogiuolo was paid in full, and Bernab&ograve;, intent on wreaking
 vengeance on his wife, left Paris and set his face towards Genoa.
 He had no mind, however, to go home, and accordingly halted at an
 estate which he had some twenty miles from the city, whither he
 sent forward a servant, in whom he reposed much trust, with two
 horses and a letter advising the lady of his return, and bidding her
 come out to meet him. At the same time he gave the servant
 secret instructions to choose some convenient place, and ruthlessly
 put the lady to death, and so return to him.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090035">
   [035]
  </a>
  On his arrival at
 Genoa the servant delivered his message and the letter to the lady,
 who received him with great cheer, and next morning got on
 horseback and set forth with him for her husband's estate.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090036">
   [036]
  </a>
  So they
 rode on, talking of divers matters, until they came to a deep gorge,
 very lonely, and shut in by high rocks and trees. The servant,
 deeming this just the place in which he might without risk of
 discovery fulfil his lord's behest, whipped out a knife, and seizing
  the lady by the arm, said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madam, commend your soul to God,
 for here must end at once your journey and your life.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090037">
   [037]
  </a>
  Terror-stricken
 by what she saw and heard, the lady cried out:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Mercy
 for God's sake; before thou slay me, tell me at least wherein I have
 wronged thee, that thou art thus minded to put me to death.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090038">
   [038]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madam,
  </q>
  said the servant,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   me you have in no wise wronged;
 but your husband--how you may have wronged him I know not--charged
 me shew you no mercy, but to slay you on this journey,
 and threatened to have me hanged by the neck, should I not do so.
 You know well how bound I am to him, and that I may not
 disobey any of his commands: God knows I pity you, but yet I can
 no otherwise.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090039">
   [039]
  </a>
  Whereat the lady burst into tears, saying:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Mercy
 for God's sake; make not thyself the murderer of one that has done
 thee no wrong, at the behest of another. The all-seeing God knows
 that I never did aught to merit such requital at my husband's hands.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090040">
    [040]
   </a>
   But enough of this for the present: there is a way in which thou
 canst serve at once God and thy master and myself, if thou wilt do
 as I bid thee: take, then, these clothes of mine and give me in
 exchange just thy doublet and a hood; and carry the clothes with
 thee to my lord and thine, and tell him that thou hast slain me;
 and I swear to thee by the life which I shall have received at thy
 hands, that I will get me gone, and there abide whence news of me
 shall never reach either him or thee or these parts.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090041">
   [041]
  </a>
  The servant,
 being loath to put her to death, soon yielded to pity; and so he took
 her clothes, allowing her to retain a little money that she had, and
 gave her one of his worser doublets and a hood; then, praying her
 to depart the country, he left her afoot in the gorge, and returned
 to his master, whom he gave to understand that he had not only
 carried out his orders but had left the lady's body a prey to wolves.
 Bernab&ograve; after a while returned to Genoa, where, the supposed
 murder being bruited abroad, he was severely censured.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090042">
   [042]
  </a>
  Alone and disconsolate, the lady, as night fell, disguised herself
 as best she could, and hied her to a neighbouring village, where,
 having procured what was needful from an old woman, she shortened
 the doublet and fitted it to her figure, converted her chemise into a
 pair of breeches, cut her hair close, and, in short, completely disguised
 herself as a sailor. She then made her way to the coast, where by
 chance she encountered a Catalan gentleman, by name Segner
  Encararch, who had landed from one of his ships, which lay in the
 offing, to recreate himself at Alba, where there was a fountain.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090043">
   [043]
  </a>
  So
 she made overture to him of her services, was engaged and taken
 aboard the ship, assuming the name Sicurano da Finale. The
 gentleman put her in better trim as to clothes, and found her so apt
 and handy at service that he was exceeding well pleased with her.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090044">
   [044]
  </a>
  Not long afterwards the Catalan sailed one of his carracks to
 Alexandria. He took with him some peregrine falcons, which he
 presented to the Soldan, who feasted him once or twice; and noting
 with approbation the behaviour of Sicurano, who always attended
 his master, he craved him of the Catalan, which request the Catalan
 reluctantly granted.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090045">
   [045]
  </a>
  Sicurano proved so apt for his new service
 that he was soon as high in grace and favour with the Soldan as he
 had been with the Catalan. Wherefore, when the time of year
 came at which there was wont to be held at Acre, then under the
 Soldan's sway, a great fair, much frequented by merchants, Christian
 and Saracen alike, and to which, for the security of the merchants
 and their goods, the Soldan always sent one of his great officers of
 state with other officers and a guard to attend upon them,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090046">
   [046]
  </a>
  he determined
 to send Sicurano, who by this time knew the language very
 well.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090047">
   [047]
  </a>
  So Sicurano was sent to Acre as governor and captain of the
 guard for the protection of the merchants and merchandise. Arrived
 there, he bestirred himself with great zeal in all matters appertaining
 to his office; and as he went his rounds of inspection, he espied
 among the merchants not a few from Italy, Sicilians, Pisans, Genoese,
 Venetians, and so forth, with whom he consorted the more readily
 because they reminded him of his native land.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090048">
   [048]
  </a>
  And so it befell that,
 alighting once at a shop belonging to some Venetian merchants, he
 saw there among other trinkets a purse and a girdle, which he
 forthwith recognised as having once been his own. Concealing
 his surprise, he blandly asked whose they were, and if they were
 for sale.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090049">
   [049]
  </a>
  He was answered by Ambrogiuolo da Piacenza, who had
 come thither with much merchandise aboard a Venetian ship, and
 hearing that the captain of the guard was asking about the ownership
 of the purse and girdle, came forward, and said with a smile:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   The
 things are mine, Sir, and I am not disposed to sell them, but, if they
 take your fancy, I will gladly give them to you.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090050">
   [050]
  </a>
  Observing the
 smile, Sicurano misdoubted that something had escaped him by
  which Ambrogiuolo had recognised him; but he answered with a
 composed air:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Thou dost smile, perchance, to see me, a soldier,
 come asking about this woman's gear?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090051">
   [051]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Not so, Sir,
  </q>
  returned
 Ambrogiuolo;
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I smile to think of the manner in which I came
 by it.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090052">
   [052]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   And pray,
  </q>
  said Sicurano,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   if thou hast no reason to
 conceal it, tell me, in God's name, how thou didst come by the
 things.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090053">
   [053]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Why, Sir,
  </q>
  said Ambrogiuolo,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   they were given me by
 a Genoese lady, with whom I once spent a night, Madam Zinevra
 by name, wife of Bernab&ograve; Lomellin, who prayed me to keep them
 as a token of her love.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090054">
    [054]
   </a>
   I smiled just now to think of the folly of
 Bernab&ograve;, who was so mad as to stake five thousand florins of gold
 against my thousand that I could not bring his wife to surrender to
 me; which I did. I won the bet; and he, who should rather have
 been punished for his insensate folly, than she for doing what all
 women do, had her put to death, as I afterwards gathered, on his
 way back from Paris to Genoa.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090055">
   [055]
  </a>
  Ambrogiuolo had not done speaking before Sicurano had discerned
 in him the evident cause of her husband's animosity against
 her, and all her woe, and had made up her mind that he should
 not escape with impunity.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090056">
   [056]
  </a>
  She therefore feigned to be much
 interested by this story, consorted frequently and very familiarly
 with Ambrogiuolo, and insidiously captured his confidence, insomuch
 that at her suggestion, when the fair was done, he, taking with
 him all his wares, accompanied her to Alexandria, where she
 provided him with a shop, and put no little of her own money in
 his hands; so that he, finding it very profitable, was glad enough
 to stay.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090057">
   [057]
  </a>
  Anxious to make her innocence manifest to Bernab&ograve;,
 Sicurano did not rest until, with the help of some great Genoese
 merchants that were in Alexandria, she had devised an expedient
 to draw him thither. Her plan succeeded; Bernab&ograve; arrived; and,
 as he was now very poor, she privily arranged that he should be
 entertained by one of her friends until occasion should serve to carry
 out her design.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090058">
   [058]
  </a>
  She had already induced Ambrogiuolo to tell his
 story to the Soldan, and the Soldan to interest himself in the matter.
 So Bernab&ograve; being come, and further delay inexpedient, she seized
 her opportunity, and persuaded the Soldan to cite Ambrogiuolo and
 Bernab&ograve; before him, that in Bernab&ograve;'s presence Ambrogiuolo
 might
 be examined of his boast touching Bernab&ograve;'s wife, and the truth
  thereof, if not to be had from him by gentle means, be elicited by
 torture.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090059">
   [059]
  </a>
  So the Soldan, having Ambrogiuolo and Bernab&ograve; before
 him, amid a great concourse of his people questioned Ambrogiuolo
 of the five thousand florins of gold that he had won from Bernab&ograve;,
 and sternly bade him tell the truth. Still more harsh was the
 aspect of Sicurano, in whom Ambrogiuolo had placed his chief
 reliance, but who now threatened him with the direst torments if
 the truth were not forthcoming.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090060">
   [060]
  </a>
  Thus hard bested on this side and
 on that, and in a manner coerced, Ambrogiuolo, thinking he had
 but to refund, in presence of Bernab&ograve; and many others accurately
 recounted the affair as it had happened.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090061">
   [061]
  </a>
  When he had done, Sicurano,
 as minister of the Soldan for the time being, turned to Bernab&ograve; and
 said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   And thy wife, thus falsely accused, what treatment did she
 meet with at thy hands?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090062">
   [062]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Mortified,
  </q>
  said Bernab&ograve;,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   by the
 loss
 of my money, and the dishonour which I deemed to have been
 done me by my wife, I was so overcome by wrath that I had her put
 to death by one of my servants, who brought me word that her
 corpse had been instantly devoured by a pack of wolves.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090063">
   [063]
  </a>
  Albeit the Soldan had heard and understood all that had passed,
 yet he did not as yet apprehend the object for which Sicurano had
 pursued the investigation. Wherefore Sicurano thus addressed him:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090064">
   [064]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   My lord, what cause this good lady has to boast of her lover and
 her husband you have now abundant means of judging; seeing that
 the lover at one and the same time despoils her of her honour,
 blasting her fair fame with slanderous accusations, and ruins her
 husband; who, more prompt to trust the falsehood of another than
 the verity of which his own long experience should have assured
 him, devotes her to death and the devouring wolves; and, moreover,
 such is the regard, such the love which both bear her that, though
 both tarry a long time with her, neither recognises her.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090065">
    [065]
   </a>
   However,
 that you may know full well what chastisements they have severally
 deserved, I will now cause her to appear in your presence and theirs,
 provided you, of your especial grace, be pleased to punish the deceiver
 and pardon the deceived.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090066">
   [066]
  </a>
  The Soldan, being minded in this matter
 to defer entirely to Sicurano, answered that he was well content,
 and bade produce the lady. Bernab&ograve;, who had firmly believed that
 she was dead, was lost in wonder; likewise Ambrogiuolo, who now
 divined his evil plight, and dreading something worse than the
  disbursement of money, knew not whether to expect the lady's advent
 with fear or with hope. His suspense was not of long duration;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090067">
   [067]
  </a>
  for,
 as soon as the Soldan signified his assent, Sicurano, weeping, threw
 herself on her knees at his feet, and discarding the tones, as she
 would fain have divested herself of the outward semblance, of a man,
 said:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090068">
   [068]
  </a>
  .
  <q direct="unspecified">
   My lord, that forlorn, hapless Zinevra am I, falsely and
 foully slandered by this traitor Ambrogiuolo, and by my cruel
 and unjust husband delivered over to his servant to slaughter and
 cast out as a prey to the wolves; for which cause I have now for
 six years been a wanderer on the face of the earth in the guise of
 a man.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090069">
   [069]
  </a>
  Then rending her robes in front and baring her breast, she
 made it manifest to the Soldan and all others who were present,
 that she was indeed a woman; then turning to Ambrogiuolo she
 haughtily challenged him to say when she had ever lain with him,
 as he had boasted. Ambrogiuolo said never a word, for he now
 recognised her, and it was as if shame had reft from him the power
 of speech.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090070">
   [070]
  </a>
  The Soldan, who had never doubted that Sicurano was
 a man, was so wonder-struck by what he saw and heard that at
 times he thought it must be all a dream. But, as wonder gave
 place to conviction of the truth, he extolled in the amplest terms the
 constancy and virtue and seemliness with which Zinevra, erstwhile
 Sicurano, had ordered her life.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090071">
   [071]
  </a>
  He then directed that she should
 be most nobly arrayed in the garb of her sex and surrounded by a
 bevy of ladies. Mindful of her intercession, he granted to Bernab&ograve;
 the life which he had forfeited; and she, when Bernab&ograve; threw
 himself at her feet and wept and craved her pardon, raised him,
 unworthy though he was, to his feet and generously forgave him,
 and tenderly embraced him as her husband.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090072">
   [072]
  </a>
  Ambrogiuolo the
 Soldan commanded to be bound to a stake, that his bare flesh,
 anointed with honey, might be exposed to the sun on one of the
 heights of the city, there to remain until it should fall to pieces
 of its own accord: and so 'twas done.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090073">
   [073]
  </a>
  He then decreed that the
 lady should have the traitor's estate, which was worth not less but
 rather more than ten thousand doubloons; whereto he added, in
 jewels and vessels of gold and silver and in money, the equivalent
 of upwards of other ten thousand doubloons, having first entertained
 her and her husband with most magnificent and ceremonious cheer,
 accordant with the lady's worth.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090074">
   [074]
  </a>
  Which done, he placed a ship at
  their disposal, and gave them leave to return to Genoa at their
 pleasure. So to Genoa they returned very rich and happy, and
 were received with all honour, especially Madam Zinevra, whom
 all the citizens had believed to be dead, and whom thenceforth, so
 long as she lived, they held of great consequence and excellency.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0209#p02090075">
   [075]
  </a>
  As for Ambrogiuolo, the very same day that he was bound to the
 stake, the honey with which his body was anointed attracted such
 swarms of flies, wasps and gadflies, wherewith that country abounds,
 that not only was his life sucked from him but his very bones were
 completely denuded of flesh; in which state, hanging by the sinews,
 they remained a long time undisturbed, for a sign and a testimony
 of his baseness to all that passed by. And so the deceived had the
 better of the deceiver.
 </p>
</div>