---
title: "Novel I"
day: "nov0601"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0601" type="novella" who="filomena">
 <h1>
  Novel I
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: filomena]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010001">
    [001]
   </a>
   A knight offers to carry Madonna Oretta a horseback
with a story, but tells it so ill that she prays him to dismount
her.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="filomena">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010002">
    [002]
   </a>
   As
   stars are set for an ornament in the serene
	expanse of heaven, and likewise in springtime flowers and leafy shrubs in the green
	meadows, so, damsels, in the hour of rare and excellent discourse, is wit with its bright
	sallies.  Which, being brief, are much more proper for ladies than for men, seeing that
	prolixity of speech, where brevity is possible, is much less allowable to them.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010003">
    [003]
   </a>
   But for whatever cause, be it the sorry quality of our understanding, or
	some especial enmity that heaven bears to our generation, few ladies or none are left
	to-day that, when occasion prompts, are able to meet it with apt speech, ay, or if aught
	of the kind they hear, can understand it aright: to our common shame be it spoken!
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010004">
    [004]
   </a>
   But as, touching this matter, enough has already been said by
	Pampinea,
   <note>
    Cf. First Day, Novel X.
   </note>
   I purpose not to enlarge thereon; but, that
	you may know what excellence resides in speech apt for the occasion, I am minded to tell
	you after how courteous a fashion a lady imposed silence upon a gentleman.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010005">
   [005]
  </a>
  'Tis no long time since there
dwelt in our city a lady, noble,
 debonair and of excellent discourse, whom
not a few of you may have
 seen or heard of, whose name--for such high
qualities merit not
 oblivion--
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010006">
   [006]
  </a>
  was Madonna Oretta, her husband being Messer
Geri Spina.
 Now this lady, happening to be, as we are, in the country,
moving
 from place to place for pleasure with a company of ladies and
gentlemen,
 whom she had entertained the day before at breakfast at her

house, and the place of their next sojourn, whither they were to go
  afoot, being some considerable distance off, one of the gentlemen
of
 the company said to her:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010007">
   [007]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madonna Oretta, so please you, I will

carry you great part of the way a horseback with one of the finest
 stories
in the world.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010008">
   [008]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Indeed, Sir,
  </q>
  replied the lady,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I pray
 you
 do
so; and I shall deem it the greatest of favours.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010009">
   [009]
  </a>
  Whereupon the

gentleman, who perhaps was no better master of his weapon than of
 his
story, began a tale, which in itself was indeed excellent, but which,
 by
repeating the same word three, four or six times, and now and
 again
harking back, and saying:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I said not well
  </q>
  ; and erring
 not seldom in
the names, setting one in place of another, he utterly
 spoiled; besides
which, his mode of delivery accorded very ill with
 the character of the
persons and incidents:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010010">
   [010]
  </a>
  insomuch that Madonna
 Oretta, as she listened, did
oft sweat, and was like to faint, as if she
 were ill and at the point of
death. And being at length able to bear
 no more of it, witting that the
gentleman had got into a mess and
 was not like to get out of it, she said
pleasantly to him:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010011">
   [011]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Sir, this
 horse of yours trots too hard; I pray you
be pleased to set me down.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0601#p06010012">
   [012]
  </a>
  The gentleman, being perchance more quick
of apprehension than
 he was skilful in narration, missed not the meaning
of her sally, and
 took it in all good and gay humour. So, leaving
unfinished the tale
 which he had begun, and so mishandled, he addressed
himself to tell
 her other stories.
 </p>
</div>