---
title: "Novel VIII"
day: "nov0908"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0908" type="novella" who="lauretta">
 <h1>
  Novel VIII
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: lauretta]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Biondello gulls Ciacco in the matter of a breakfast: for
 which prank Ciacco is cunningly avenged on Biondello,
 causing him to be shamefully beaten.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080002">
    [002]
   </a>
   All
   the company by common consent pronounced it no dream
 but a vision that Talano had had in his sleep, so exactly, no circumstance
 lacking, had it fallen out according as he had seen it. However,
 as soon as all had done speaking, the queen bade Lauretta
 follow suit; which Lauretta did on this wise:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="lauretta">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080003">
    [003]
   </a>
   As, most discreet
 my ladies, those that have preceded me to-day have almost all taken
 their cue from somewhat that has been said before, so, prompted by
 the stern vengeance taken by the scholar in Pampinea's narrative of
 yesterday, I am minded to tell you of a vengeance that was indeed
 less savage, but for all that grievous enough to him on whom it was
 wreaked.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080004">
   [004]
  </a>
  Wherefore I say that there was once at Florence one that all
 folk called Ciacco, a man second to none that ever lived for inordinate
 gluttony, who, lacking the means to support the expenditure
 which his gluttony demanded, and being, for the rest, well-mannered
 and well furnished with excellent and merry jests, did, without turning
 exactly court jester, cultivate a somewhat biting wit, and loved
 to frequent the houses of the rich, and such as kept good tables;
 whither, bidden or unbidden, he not seldom resorted for breakfast or
 supper.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080005">
   [005]
  </a>
  There was also in those days at Florence one that was called
 Biondello, a man very short of stature, and not a little debonair, more
 trim than any fly, with his blond locks surmounted by a coif, and
 never a hair out of place; and he and Ciacco were two of a trade.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080006">
   [006]
  </a>
  Now one morning in Lent Biondello, being in the fish-market
 purchasing two mighty fat lampreys for Messer Vieri de' Cerchi, was
  observed
 thus engaged by Ciacco, who came up to him, and:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   What means this?
  </q>
  quoth he.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080007">
   [007]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Why,
  </q>
  replied Biondello,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   'tis
 that yestereve Messer Corso Donati had three lampreys much finer
 than these and a sturgeon sent to his house, but as they did not
 suffice for a breakfast that he is to give certain gentlemen, he has
 commissioned me to buy him these two beside. Wilt thou not be
	there?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080008">
   [008]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Ay, marry, that will I,
  </q>
  returned Ciacco.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080009">
   [009]
  </a>
  And in what
 he deemed due time he hied him to Messer Corso Donati's house, where
 he found him with some of his neighbours not yet gone to breakfast.
 And being asked by Messer Corso with what intent he was come,
 he answered:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I am come, Sir, to breakfast with you and your
 company.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080010">
   [010]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   And welcome art thou,
  </q>
  returned Messer Corso,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   go
 we then to breakfast, for 'tis now the time.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080011">
   [011]
  </a>
  So to table they went,
 where nought was set before them but pease and the inward part of
 the tunny salted, and afterwards the common fish of the Arno fried.
 Wherefore Ciacco, not a little wroth at the trick that he perceived
 Biondello had played him, resolved to pay him out. And not many
 days after Biondello, who had meanwhile had many a laugh with his
 friends over Ciacco's discomfiture,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080012">
   [012]
  </a>
  met him, and after greeting him,
 asked him with a laugh what Messer Corso's lampreys had been like.
  <q direct="unspecified">
   That question,
  </q>
  replied Ciacco,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   thou wilt be able to answer much
 better than I before eight days are gone by.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080013">
   [013]
  </a>
  And parting from
 Biondello upon the word, he went forthwith and hired a cozening
 rogue, and having thrust a glass bottle into his hand, brought him
 within sight of the Loggia de' Cavicciuli; and there, pointing to a
 knight, one Messer Filippo Argenti, a tall man and stout, and of
 a high courage, and haughty, choleric and cross-grained as ne'er
 another, he said to him:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080014">
   [014]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Thou wilt go, flask in hand, to Messer
 Filippo, and wilt say to him: 'I am sent to you, Sir, by Biondello,
 who entreats you to be pleased to colour this flask for him with some
 of your good red wine, for that he is minded to have a good time with
 his catamites.' And of all things have a care that he lay not hands
 upon thee, for he would make thee rue the day, and would spoil my
 sport.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080015">
   [015]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Have I aught else to say?
  </q>
  enquired the rogue.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080016">
   [016]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Nothing
 more,
  </q>
  returned Ciacco:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   and now get thee gone, and when thou
 hast delivered the message, bring me back the flask, and I will pay
 thee.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080017">
   [017]
  </a>
  So away went the rogue, and did the errand to Messer Filippo,
  who
 forthwith, being a hasty man, jumped to the conclusion that
 Biondello, whom he knew, was making mock of him, and while an
 angry flush overspread his face:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   'Colour the flask, forsooth!'
  </q>
  quoth he,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   and 'Catamites!' God send thee and him a bad year!
  </q>
  and therewith up he started, and reached forward to lay hold of the
 rogue,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080018">
   [018]
  </a>
  who, being on the alert, gave him the slip and was off, and
 reported Messer Filippo's answer to Ciacco, who had observed what
 had passed.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080019">
   [019]
  </a>
  Having paid the rogue, Ciacco rested not until he had
 found Biondello, to whom:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Wast thou but now,
  </q>
  quoth he,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   at
 the Loggia de' Cavicciuli?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080020">
   [020]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Indeed no,
  </q>
  replied Biondello:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   wherefore
 such a question?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080021">
   [021]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Because,
  </q>
  returned Ciacco,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I may tell
 thee that thou art sought for by Messer Filippo, for what cause I know
 not.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080022">
   [022]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Good,
  </q>
  quoth Biondello,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I will go thither and speak with
 him.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080023">
   [023]
  </a>
  So away went Biondello, and Ciacco followed him to see
 what course the affair would take.
 </p>
 <p>
  Now having failed to catch the rogue, Messer Filippo was still
 very wroth, and inly fumed and fretted, being unable to make out
 aught from what the rogue had said save that Biondello was set on
 by some one or another to flout him. And while thus he vexed his
 spirit, up came Biondello; whom he no sooner espied than he made
 for him, and dealt him a mighty blow in the face, and tore his hair
 and coif, and cast his capuche on the ground,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080024">
   [024]
  </a>
  and to his
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Alas, Sir,
 what means this?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080025">
   [025]
  </a>
  still beating him amain:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Traitor,
  </q>
  cried he;
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I
 will give thee to know what it means to send me such a message.
 'Colour the flask,' forsooth, and 'Catamites!' Dost take me for a
 stripling, to be befooled by thee?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080026">
   [026]
  </a>
  And therewith he pummelled
 Biondello's face all over with a pair of fists that were liker to iron
 than aught else, until it was but a mass of bruises; he also tore and
 dishevelled all his hair, tumbled him in the mud, rent all his clothes
 upon his back, and that without allowing him breathing-space to ask
 why he thus used him, or so much as utter a word.
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Colour me
 the flask!
  </q>
  and
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Catamites!
  </q>
  rang in his ears;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080027">
   [027]
  </a>
  but what the
 words signified he knew not.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080028">
   [028]
  </a>
  In the end very badly beaten, and in
 very sorry and ragged trim, many folk having gathered around them,
 they, albeit not without the utmost difficulty, rescued him from
 Messer Filippo's hands, and told him why Messer Filippo had thus
 used him, censuring him for sending him such a message, and adding
 that thenceforth he would know Messer Filippo better, and that he
  was
 not a man to be trifled with.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080029">
   [029]
  </a>
  Biondello told them in tearful
 exculpation that he had never sent for wine to Messer Filippo:
 then, when they had put him in a little better trim, crestfallen and
 woebegone, he went home imputing his misadventure to Ciacco.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080030">
   [030]
  </a>
  And when, many days afterwards, the marks of his ill-usage being
 gone from his face, he began to go abroad again, it chanced that
 Ciacco met him, and with a laugh:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Biondello,
  </q>
  quoth he,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   how
 didst thou relish Messer Filippo's wine?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080031">
   [031]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Why, as to that,
  </q>
  replied Biondello,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   would thou hadst relished the lampreys of Messer
 Corso as much!
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080032">
   [032]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   So!
  </q>
  returned Ciacco,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   such meat as thou then
 gavest me, thou mayst henceforth give me, as often as thou art so
 minded; and I will give thee even such drink as I have given thee.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0908#p09080033">
   [033]
  </a>
  So Biondello, witting that against Ciacco his might was not equal to
 his spite, prayed God for his peace, and was careful never to flout
 him again.
 </p>
</div>