---
title: "Novel II"
day: "nov0502"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0502" type="novella" who="emilia">
 <h1>
  Novel II
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: emilia]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020001" id="p05020001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Gostanza loves Martuccio Gomito, and hearing that he is
 dead, gives way to despair, and hies her alone aboard
 a boat, which is wafted by the wind to Susa. She
 finds him alive in Tunis, and makes herself known to
 him, who, having by his counsel gained high place in
 the king's favour, marries her, and returns with her
 wealthy to Lipari.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020002" id="p05020002">
    [002]
   </a>
   Pamfilo's
   story being ended, the
      queen, after commending it not a little, called for one to follow from Emilia; who thus
      began:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="emilia">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020003" id="p05020003">
    [003]
   </a>
   Meet and right it is that one should rejoice when events so fall
 out that passion meets with its due reward: and as love merits in
 the long run rather joy than suffering, far gladlier obey I the queen's
 than I did the king's behest, and address myself to our present theme.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020004" id="p05020004">
   [004]
  </a>
  You are to know then, dainty ladies, that not far from Sicily there is
 an islet called Lipari, in which, no great while ago, there dwelt a
 damsel, Gostanza by name, fair as fair could be, and of one of the
 most honourable families in the island. And one Martuccio Gomito,
 who was also of the island, a young man most gallant and courteous,
 and worthy for his condition, became enamoured of Gostanza;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020005" id="p05020005">
   [005]
  </a>
  who in like manner grew so afire for him that she was ever ill at ease,
 except she saw him. Martuccio, craving her to wife, asked her of
 her father, who made answer that, Martuccio being poor, he was not
 minded to give her to him.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020006" id="p05020006">
   [006]
  </a>
  Mortified to be thus rejected by reason
 of poverty, Martuccio took an oath in presence of some of his friends
 and kinsfolk that Lipari should know him no more, until he was
 wealthy. So away he sailed, and took to scouring the seas as a rover
 on the coast of Barbary, preying upon all whose force matched not
  his
 own. In which way of life he found Fortune favourable enough,
 had he but known how to rest and be thankful:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020007" id="p05020007">
   [007]
  </a>
  but 'twas not
 enough that he and his comrades in no long time waxed very
 wealthy; their covetousness was inordinate, and, while they sought
 to gratify it, they chanced in an encounter with certain Saracen ships
 to be taken after a long defence, and despoiled, and, most part of
 them, thrown into the sea by their captors, who, after sinking his
 ship, took Martuccio with them to Tunis, and clapped him in prison,
 and there kept him a long time in a very sad plight.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020008" id="p05020008">
   [008]
  </a>
  Meanwhile, not by one or two, but by divers and not a few
 persons, tidings reached Lipari that all that were with Martuccio
 aboard his bark had perished in the sea.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020009" id="p05020009">
   [009]
  </a>
  The damsel, whose grief on
 Martuccio's departure had known no bounds, now hearing that he was
 dead with the rest, wept a great while, and made up her mind to
 have done with life; but, lacking the resolution to lay violent hands
 upon herself, she bethought her how she might devote herself to
 death by some novel expedient.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020010" id="p05020010">
   [010]
  </a>
  So one night she stole out of her
 father's house, and hied her to the port, and there by chance she
 found, lying a little apart from the other craft, a fishing boat, which,
 as the owners had but just quitted her, was still equipped with mast
 and sails and oars.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020011" id="p05020011">
   [011]
  </a>
  Aboard which boat she forthwith got, and being,
 like most of the women of the island, not altogether without nautical
 skill, she rowed some distance out to sea, and then hoisted sail, and
 cast away oars and tiller, and let the boat drift,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020012" id="p05020012">
   [012]
  </a>
  deeming that a boat
 without lading or steersman would certainly be either capsized by
 the wind or dashed against some rock and broken in pieces, so that
 escape she could not, even if she would, but must perforce drown.
 And so, her head wrapped in a mantle, she stretched herself weeping
 on the floor of the boat.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020013" id="p05020013">
   [013]
  </a>
  But it fell out quite otherwise than she
 had conjectured: for, the wind being from the north, and very
 equable, with next to no sea, the boat kept an even keel, and next
 day about vespers bore her to land hard by a city called Susa, full a
 hundred miles beyond Tunis.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020014" id="p05020014">
   [014]
  </a>
  To the damsel 'twas all one whether
 she were at sea or ashore, for, since she had been aboard, she had
 never once raised, nor, come what might, meant she ever to raise,
 her head.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020015" id="p05020015">
   [015]
  </a>
  Now it so chanced, that, when the boat grounded, there was on
 the shore a poor woman that was in the employ of some fishermen,
  whose
 nets she was just taking out of the sunlight.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020016" id="p05020016">
   [016]
  </a>
  Seeing the
 boat under full sail, she marvelled how it should be suffered to drive
 ashore, and conjectured that the fishermen on board were asleep. So
 to the boat she hied her, and finding therein only the damsel fast
 asleep, she called her many times, and at length awakened her; and
 perceiving by her dress that she was a Christian, she asked her in
 Latin how it was that she was come thither all alone in the boat.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020017" id="p05020017">
   [017]
  </a>
  Hearing the Latin speech, the damsel wondered whether the wind
 had not shifted, and carried her back to Lipari: so up she started,
 gazed about her, and finding herself ashore and the aspect of the
 country strange, asked the good woman where she was.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020018" id="p05020018">
   [018]
  </a>
  To which
 the good woman made answer:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   My daughter, thou art hard by
 Susa in Barbary.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020019" id="p05020019">
   [019]
  </a>
  Whereupon the damsel, sorrowful that God had
 not seen fit to accord her the boon of death, apprehensive of dishonour,
 and at her wits' end, sat herself down at the foot of her
 boat, and burst into tears.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020020" id="p05020020">
   [020]
  </a>
  Which the good woman saw not without
 pity, and persuaded her to come with her into her hut, and there by
 coaxing drew from her how she was come thither; and knowing
 that she could not but be fasting, she set before her her own coarse
 bread and some fish and water, and prevailed upon her to eat a little.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020021" id="p05020021">
   [021]
  </a>
  Gostanza thereupon asked her, who she was that thus spoke Latin;
 whereto she answered that her name was Carapresa, and that she
 was from Trapani, where she had served some Christian fishermen.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020022" id="p05020022">
   [022]
  </a>
  To the damsel, sad indeed though she was, this name Carapresa,
 wherefore she knew not, seemed to be of happy augury, so that she
 began to take hope, she knew not why, and to grow somewhat less
 fain of death: wherefore without disclosing who or whence she was,
 she earnestly besought the good woman for the love of God to have
 pity on her youth, and advise her how best to avoid insult.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020023" id="p05020023">
   [023]
  </a>
  Whereupon
 Carapresa, good woman that she was, left her in her hut, while
 with all speed she picked up her nets; and on her return she wrapped
 her in her own mantle, and led her to Susa.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020024" id="p05020024">
   [024]
  </a>
  Arrived there, she said
 to her:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Gostanza, I shall bring thee to the house of an excellent
 Saracen lady, for whom I frequently do bits of work, as she has
 occasion: she is an old lady and compassionate: I will commend
 thee to her care as best I may, and I doubt not she will right gladly
 receive thee, and entreat thee as her daughter: and thou wilt serve
 her, and, while thou art with her, do all thou canst to gain her favour,
   until
 such time as God may send thee better fortune;
  </q>
  and as she
 said, so she did.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020025" id="p05020025">
   [025]
  </a>
  The old lady listened, and then, gazing steadfastly in the damsel's
 face, shed tears, and taking her hand, kissed her forehead, and led her
 into the house, where she and some other women dwelt quite by
 themselves, doing divers kinds of handiwork in silk and palm leaves
 and leather.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020026" id="p05020026">
   [026]
  </a>
  Wherein the damsel in a few days acquired some skill,
 and thenceforth wrought together with them; and rose wondrous
 high in the favour and good graces of all the ladies, who soon taught
 her their language.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020027" id="p05020027">
   [027]
  </a>
  Now while the damsel, mourned at home as lost and dead, dwelt
 thus at Susa, it so befell that, Mariabdela being then King of Tunis,
 a young chieftain in Granada, of great power, and backed by mighty
 allies, gave out that the realm of Tunis belonged to him, and having
 gathered a vast army, made a descent upon Tunis with intent to
      expel the King from the realm.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020028" id="p05020028">
   [028]
  </a>
  Martuccio Gomito, who knew the
 language of Barbary well, heard the tidings in prison, and learning
 that the King of Tunis was mustering a mighty host for the defence
 of his kingdom, said to one of the warders that were in charge of
 him and his comrades:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   If I might have speech of the King, I am
 confident that the advice that I should give him would secure him
 the victory.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020029" id="p05020029">
   [029]
  </a>
  The warder repeated these words to his chief, who
 forthwith carried them to the King. Wherefore by the King's command
 Martuccio was brought before him, and being asked by him
 what the advice, of which he had spoken, might be, answered on
 this wise:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020030" id="p05020030">
   [030]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Sire, if in old days, when I was wont to visit this
 country of yours, I duly observed the manner in which you order
 your battle, methinks you place your main reliance upon archers;
 and therefore, if you could contrive that your enemy's supply of
 arrows should give out and your own continue plentiful, I apprehend
 that you would win the battle.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020031" id="p05020031">
   [031]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Ay indeed,
  </q>
  replied the King,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I
 make no doubt that, could I but accomplish that, I should conquer.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020032" id="p05020032">
   [032]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Nay but, Sire,
  </q>
  returned Martuccio,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   you may do it, if you will.
 Listen, and I will tell you how. You must fit the bows of your
 archers with strings much finer than those that are in common use,
 and match them with arrows, the notches of which will not admit
 any but these fine strings; and this you must do so secretly that
 your enemy may not know it, else he will find means to be even
   with
 you.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020033" id="p05020033">
    [033]
   </a>
   Which counsel I give you for the following reason:
 When your and your enemy's archers have expended all their arrows,
 you wot that the enemy will fall to picking up the arrows that your
 men have shot during the battle, and your men will do the like by
 the enemy's arrows;
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020034" id="p05020034">
    [034]
   </a>
   but the enemy will not be able to make use of
 your men's arrows, by reason that their fine notches will not suffice
 to admit the stout strings, whereas your men will be in the contrary
 case in regard of the enemy's arrows, for the fine string will very
 well receive the large-notched arrow, and so your men will have
 an abundant supply of arrows, while the enemy will be at a loss for
 them.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020035" id="p05020035">
   [035]
  </a>
  The King, who lacked not sagacity, appreciated Martuccio's
 advice, and gave full effect to it; whereby he came out of the war
 a conqueror, and Martuccio, being raised to the chief place in his
 favour, waxed rich and powerful.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020036" id="p05020036">
   [036]
  </a>
  Which matters being bruited
 throughout the country, it came to the ears of Gostanza that Martuccio
 Gomito, whom she had long supposed to be dead, was alive;
 whereby her love for him, some embers of which still lurked in her
 heart, burst forth again in sudden flame, and gathered strength, and
 revived her dead hope.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020037" id="p05020037">
   [037]
  </a>
  Wherefore she frankly told all her case to
 the good lady with whom she dwelt, saying that she would fain go
 to Tunis, that her eyes might have assurance of that which the
 report received by her ears had made them yearn to see.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020038" id="p05020038">
   [038]
  </a>
  The lady
 fell heartily in with the girl's desire, and, as if she had been her
 mother, embarked with her for Tunis, where on their arrival they
 were honourably received in the house of one of her kinswomen.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020039" id="p05020039">
   [039]
  </a>
  Carapresa, who had attended her, being sent to discover what she
 might touching Martuccio, brought back word that he was alive, and
 high in honour and place. The gentlewoman was minded that none
 but herself should apprise Martuccio of the arrival of his Gostanza:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020040" id="p05020040">
   [040]
  </a>
  wherefore she hied her one day to Martuccio, and said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Martuccio,
 there is come to my house a servant of thine from Lipari,
 who would fain speak with thee here privily, and for that he would
 not have me trust another, I am come hither myself to deliver his
 message.
  </q>
  Martuccio thanked her, and forthwith hied him with her
 to her house:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020041" id="p05020041">
   [041]
  </a>
  where no sooner did the girl see him than she all
 but died for joy, and carried away by her feelings, fell upon his neck
 with open arms and embraced him, and, what with sorrow of his
  past
 woes and her present happiness, said never a word, but softly
 wept.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020042" id="p05020042">
   [042]
  </a>
  Martuccio regarded her for a while in silent wonder; then,
 heaving a sigh, he said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Thou livest then, my Gostanza? Long
 since I heard that thou wast lost; nor was aught known of thee
 at home.
  </q>
  Which said, he tenderly and with tears embraced her.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020043" id="p05020043">
   [043]
  </a>
  Gostanza told him all her adventures, and how honourably she had
 been entreated by the gentlewoman with whom she had dwelt.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020044" id="p05020044">
   [044]
  </a>
  And so long time they conversed, and then Martuccio parted
 from her, and hied him back to his lord the King, and told him
 all, to wit, his own adventures and those of the girl, adding that
 with his leave he was minded to marry her according to our law.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020045" id="p05020045">
   [045]
  </a>
  Which matters the King found passing strange; and having called
 the girl to him, and learned from her that 'twas even as Martuccio
 had said:
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020046" id="p05020046">
   [046]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Well indeed,
  </q>
  quoth he,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   hast thou won thy husband.
  </q>
  Then caused he gifts most ample and excellent to be brought forth,
 part of which he gave to Gostanza, and part to Martuccio, leaving
 them entirely to their own devices in regard of one another.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020047" id="p05020047">
   [047]
  </a>
  Then
 Martuccio, in terms most honourable, bade farewell to the old lady
 with whom Gostanza had dwelt, thanking her for the service she
 had rendered to Gostanza, and giving her presents suited to her condition,
 and commending her to God, while Gostanza shed many a
 tear: after which, by leave of the King, they went aboard a light
 bark, taking with them Carapresa, and, sped by a prosperous breeze,
 arrived at Lipari, where they were received with such cheer as 'twere
 vain to attempt to describe.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0502#p05020048" id="p05020048">
   [048]
  </a>
  There were Martuccio and Gostanza
 wedded with all pomp and splendour; and there long time in
 easeful peace they had joyance of their love.
 </p>
</div>