---
title: "Novel V"
day: "nov0505"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0505" type="novella" who="neifile">
 <h1>
  Novel V
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: neifile]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Guidotto da Cremona dies leaving a girl to Giacomino da
 Pavia. She has two lovers in Faenza, to wit, Giannole
 di Severino and Minghino di Mingole, who fight
 about her. She is discovered to be Giannole's sister,
 and is given to Minghino to wife.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050002">
    [002]
   </a>
   All
   the ladies laughed so heartily over the story of the
 nightingale, that, even when Filostrato had finished, they could not control
 their merriment. However, when the laughter was somewhat
 abated, the queen said:
   <q direct="unspecified">
    Verily if thou didst yesterday afflict us,
 to-day thou hast tickled us to such purpose that none of us may
 justly complain of thee.
   </q>
   Then, as the turn had now come round
 to Neifile, she bade her give them a story. And thus, blithely,
 Neifile began:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="neifile">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050003">
    [003]
   </a>
   As Filostrato went to Romagna for the matter of
 his discourse, I too am fain to make a short journey through the
 same country in what I am about to relate to you.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050004">
   [004]
  </a>
  I say, then, that there dwelt of yore in the city of Fano two
 Lombards, the one ycleped Guidotto da Cremona and the other
 Giacomino da Pavia, men advanced in life, who, being soldiers, had
 spent the best part of their youth in feats of arms.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050005">
   [005]
  </a>
  Now Guidotto,
 being at the point of death, and having no son or any friend or kinsman
 in whom he placed more trust than in Giacomino, left him a
 girl of about ten years, and all that he had in the world; and so,
 having given him to know not a little of his affairs, he died.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050006">
   [006]
  </a>
  About
 the same time the city of Faenza, which had long been at war and
 in a most sorry plight, began to recover some measure of prosperity;
 and thereupon liberty to return thither on honourable terms was
 accorded to all that were so minded. Whither, accordingly, Giacomino,
 who had dwelt there aforetime, and liked the place, returned
  with all his goods and chattels, taking with him the girl left him by
 Guidotto, whom he loved and entreated as his daughter.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050007">
   [007]
  </a>
  The girl
 grew up as beautiful a maiden as was to be found in the city; and
 no less debonair and modest was she than fair. Wherefore she
 lacked not admirers; but above all two young men, both very gallant
 and of equal merit, the one Giannole di Severino, the other Minghino
 di Mingole, affected her with so ardent a passion, that, growing
 jealous, they came to hate one another with an inordinate hatred.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050008">
   [008]
  </a>
  Right gladly would each have espoused her, she being now fifteen
 years old, but that his kinsmen forbade it; wherefore seeing that
 neither might have her in an honourable way, each determined to
 compass his end as best he might.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050009">
   [009]
  </a>
  Now Giacomino had in his house an ancient maid, and a man, by
 name Crivello, a very pleasant and friendly sort of fellow, with whom
 Giannole grew familiar, and in due time confided to him all his love,
 praying him to further the attainment of his desire, and promising to
 reward him handsomely, if he did so.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050010">
   [010]
  </a>
  Crivello made answer:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Thou
 must know that there is but one way in which I might be of service
 to thee in this affair: I might contrive that thou shouldst be where
 she is when Giacomino is gone off to supper; but, were I to presume
 to say aught to her on thy behalf, she would never listen to me.
 This, if it please thee, I promise to do for thee, and will be as good
 as my word; and then thou canst do whatever thou mayst deem
 most expedient.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050011">
   [011]
  </a>
  Giannole said that he asked no more; and so 'twas
 arranged.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050012">
   [012]
  </a>
  Meanwhile Minghino on his part had made friends with the
 maid, on whom he had so wrought that she had carried several
 messages to the girl, and had gone far to kindle her to his love, and
 furthermore had promised to contrive that he should meet her when
 for any cause Giacomino should be from home in the evening.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050013">
   [013]
  </a>
  And
 so it befell that no long time after these parleys, Giacomino, by
 Crivello's management, was to go sup at the house of a friend, and
 by preconcert between Crivello and Giannole, upon signal given,
 Giannole was to come to Giacomino's house and find the door open.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050014">
   [014]
  </a>
  The maid, on her part, witting nought of the understanding between
 Crivello and Giannole, let Minghino know that Giacomino would not
 sup at home, and bade him be near the house, so that he might come
 and enter it on sight of a signal from her.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050015">
   [015]
  </a>
  The evening came; neither
  of the lovers knew aught of what the other was about; but, being
 suspicious of one another, they came to take possession, each with
 his own company of armed friends. Minghino, while awaiting the
 signal, rested with his company in the house of one of his friends
 hard by the girl's house: Giannole with his company was posted a
 little farther off.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050016">
   [016]
  </a>
  Crivello and the maid, when Giacomino was gone,
 did each their endeavour to get the other out of the way. Crivello
 said to the maid:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   How is it thou takest not thyself off to bed,
 but goest still hither and thither about the house?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050017">
   [017]
  </a>
  And the maid
 said to Crivello:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Nay, but why goest thou not after thy master?
 Thou hast supped; what awaitest thou here?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050018">
   [018]
  </a>
  And so, neither
      being able to make the other quit the post,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050019">
   [019]
  </a>
  Crivello, the hour
 concerted with Giannole being come, said to himself: What care
 I for her? If she will not keep quiet, 'tis like to be the worse for
 her. Whereupon he gave the signal, and hied him to the door,
 which he had no sooner opened, than Giannole entered with two of
 his companions, and finding the girl in the saloon, laid hands on her
 with intent to carry her off.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050020">
   [020]
  </a>
  The girl struggled, and shrieked amain,
 as did also the maid. Minghino, fearing the noise, hasted to the
 spot with his companions; and, seeing that the girl was already being
 borne across the threshold, they drew their swords, and cried out in
 chorus:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Ah! Traitors that ye are, ye are all dead men! 'Twill
 go otherwise than ye think for. What means this force?
  </q>
  Which
 said, they fell upon them with their swords,
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050021">
   [021]
  </a>
  while the neighbours,
 alarmed by the noise, came hurrying forth with lights and arms, and
 protested that 'twas an outrage, and took Minghino's part. So, after
 a prolonged struggle, Minghino wrested the girl from Giannole, and
 set her again in Giacomino's house. Nor were the combatants
 separated before the officers of the Governor of the city came up
 and arrested not a few of them; among them Minghino and Giannole
 and Crivello, whom they marched off to prison.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050022">
   [022]
  </a>
  However,
 peace being restored and Giacomino returned, 'twas with no little
 chagrin that he heard of the affair; but finding upon investigation
 that the girl was in no wise culpable, he was somewhat reassured;
 and determined, lest the like should again happen, to bestow the girl
 in marriage as soon as might be.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050023">
   [023]
  </a>
  On the morrow the kinsfolk of the two lovers, having learned
 the truth of the matter, and knowing what evil might ensue to the
  captives, if Giacomino should be minded to take the course which
 he reasonably might, came and gave him good words, beseeching him
 to let the kindly feeling, the love, which they believed he bore
 to them, his suppliants, count for more with him than the wrong
 that the hare-brained gallants had done him, and on their part and
 their own offering to make any amend that he might require.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050024">
   [024]
  </a>
  Giacomino, who had seen many things in his time, and lacked not
 sound sense, made answer briefly:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Gentlemen, were I in my own
 country, as I am in yours, I hold myself in such sort your friend
 that nought would I do in this matter, or in any other, save what
 might be agreeable to you:
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050025">
    [025]
   </a>
   besides which, I have the more reason
 to consider your wishes, because 'tis against you yourselves that you
 have offended, inasmuch as this damsel, whatever many folk may
 suppose, is neither of Cremona nor of Pavia, but is of Faenza, albeit
 neither I nor she, nor he from whom I had her, did ever wot whose
 daughter she was: wherefore, touching that you ask of me, I will
 even do just as you bid me.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050026">
   [026]
  </a>
  The worthy men found it passing
 strange that the girl should be of Faenza; and having thanked Giacomino
 for his handsome answer, they besought him that he would be
 pleased to tell them how she had come into his hands, and how he
 knew that she was of Faenza.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050027">
   [027]
  </a>
  To whom Giacomino replied on
 this wise:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   A comrade and friend I had, Guidotto da Cremona,
 who, being at the point of death, told me that, when this city of
 Faenza was taken by the Emperor Frederic, he and his comrades,
 entering one of the houses during the sack, found there good store of
 booty, and never a soul save this girl,
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050028">
    [028]
   </a>
   who, being two years old or
 thereabouts, greeted him as father as he came up the stairs; wherefore
 he took pity on her, and carried her with whatever else was in the
 house away with him to Fano; where on his deathbed he left her to
 me, charging me in due time to bestow her in marriage, and give her
 all his goods and chattels by way of dowry:
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050029">
    [029]
   </a>
   but, albeit she is now
 of marriageable age, I have not been able to provide her with a
 husband to my mind; though right glad should I be to do so, that
 nought like the event of yesterday may again befall me.
  </q>
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050030">
   [030]
  </a>
  Now among the rest of those present was one Guglielmo da
 Medicina, who had been with Guidotto on that occasion, and knew
 well whose house it was that Guidotto had sacked; and seeing the
 owner there among the rest, he went up to him, and said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Dost
   hear, Bernabuccio, what Giacomino says?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050031">
   [031]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Ay,
  </q>
  answered
 Bernabuccio,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   and I gave the more heed thereto, for that I call to mind
 that during those disorders I lost a little daughter of just the age that
 Giacomino speaks of.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050032">
   [032]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   'Tis verily she then,
  </q>
  said Guglielmo,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   for once when I was with Guidotto I heard him describe what house
 it was that he had sacked, and I wist that 'twas thine. Wherefore
 search thy memory if there be any sign by which thou thinkest to
 recognize her, and let her be examined that thou mayst be assured that
 she is thy daughter.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050033">
   [033]
  </a>
  So Bernabuccio pondered a while, and then
 recollected that she ought to have a scar, shewing like a tiny cross,
 above her left ear, being where he had excised a tumour a little while
 before that affair: wherefore without delay he went up to Giacomino,
 who was still there, and besought him to let him go home with
 him and see the damsel.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050034">
   [034]
  </a>
  Giacomino gladly did so, and no sooner was
 the girl brought into Bernabuccio's presence, than, as he beheld her,
 'twas as if he saw the face of her mother, who was still a beautiful
 woman. However, he would not rest there, but besought Giacomino
 of his grace to permit him to lift a lock or two of hair above her left
 ear; whereto Giacomino consented.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050035">
   [035]
  </a>
  So Bernabuccio approached
 her where she stood somewhat shamefast, and with his right hand
 lifted her locks, and, seeing the cross, wist that in very truth she was
 his daughter, and tenderly wept and embraced her, albeit she withstood
 him;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050036">
   [036]
  </a>
  and then, turning to Giacomino, he said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   My
 brother, the girl is my daughter; 'twas my house that Guidotto
 sacked, and so sudden was the assault that my wife, her mother,
 forgot her, and we have always hitherto supposed, that, my house
 being burned that same day, she perished in the flames.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050037">
   [037]
  </a>
  Catching
 his words, and seeing that he was advanced in years, the girl inclined
 to believe him, and impelled by some occult instinct, suffered his
 embraces, and melting, mingled her tears with his.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050038">
   [038]
  </a>
  Bernabuccio
 forthwith sent for her mother and her sisters and other kinswomen
 and her brothers, and having shewn her to them all, and told the
 story, after they had done her great cheer and embraced her a
 thousand times, to Giacomino's no small delight, he brought her
 home with him.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050039">
   [039]
  </a>
  Which coming to the ears of the Governor of the
 city, the worthy man, knowing that Giannole, whom he had in
 ward, was Bernabuccio's son and the girl's brother, made up his
 mind to deal leniently with Giannole: wherefore he took upon
  himself the part of mediator in the affair, and having made peace
 between Bernabuccio and Giacomino and Giannole and Minghino,
 gave Agnesa--such was the damsel's name--to Minghino to wife, to
 the great delight of all Minghino's kinsfolk, and set at liberty not
 only Giannole and Minghino but Crivello, and the others their
 confederates in the affair.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0505#p05050040">
   [040]
  </a>
  Whereupon Minghino with the blithest
 of hearts wedded Agnesa with all due pomp and circumstance, and
 brought her home, where for many a year thereafter he lived with
 her in peace and prosperity.
 </p>
</div>