---
title: "Novel V"
day: "nov0105"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0105" type="novella" who="fiammetta">
 <h1>
  Novel V
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: fiammetta]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050001">
    [001]
   </a>
   The Marchioness of Monferrato by a banquet of hens
	seasoned with wit checks the mad passion of the King
	of France.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050002">
    [002]
   </a>
   The
   story told by Dioneo evoked at first some qualms of shame
      in the minds of the ladies, as was apparent by the modest blush that
      tinged their faces: then exchanging glances, and scarce able to
      refrain their mirth, they listened to it with half-suppressed smiles.
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050003">
    [003]
   </a>
   On its conclusion they bestowed upon Dioneo a few words of gentle
      reprehension with intent to admonish him that such stories were not
      to be told among ladies. The queen then turned to Fiammetta,
      who was seated on the grass at her side, and bade her follow suit;
      and Fiammetta with a gay and gracious mien thus began:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="fiammetta">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050004">
    [004]
   </a>
   The line upon which our story-telling proceeds, to wit, to shew the
      virtue that resides in apt and ready repartees, pleases me well; and as
      in affairs of love men and women are in diverse case, for to aspire to
      the love of a woman of higher lineage than his own is wisdom in
      man, whereas a woman's good sense is then most conspicuous when
      she knows how to preserve herself from becoming enamoured of a
      man, her superior in rank, I am minded, fair my ladies, to shew
      you by the story which I am now to tell, how by deed and word a
      gentlewoman both defended herself against attack, and weaned her
      suitor from his love.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050005">
   [005]
  </a>
  The Marquis of Monferrato, a paladin of distinguished prowess,
      was gone overseas as gonfalonier of the Church in a general array of
      the Christian forces.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050006">
   [006]
  </a>
  Whose merits being canvassed at the court of
      Philippe le Borgne, on the eve of his departure from France on the
      same service, a knight observed, that there was not under the stars
  a couple comparable to the Marquis and his lady; in that, while the
      Marquis was a paragon of the knightly virtues, his lady for beauty
      and honour was without a peer among all the other ladies of the
      world.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050007">
   [007]
  </a>
  These words made so deep an impression on the mind of
      the King of France that, though he had never seen the lady, he fell
      ardently in love with her, and, being to join the armada, resolved that
      his port of embarcation should be no other than Genoa, in order that,
      travelling thither by land, he might find a decent pretext for visiting
      the Marchioness, with whom in the absence of the Marquis he
      trusted to have the success which he desired;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050008">
   [008]
  </a>
  nor did he fail to put
      his design in execution. Having sent his main army on before, he
      took the road himself with a small company of gentlemen, and, as
      they approached the territory of the Marquis, he despatched a courier
      to the Marchioness, a day in advance, to let her know that he
      expected to breakfast with her the next morning.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050009">
   [009]
  </a>
  The lady, who
      knew her part and played it well, replied graciously, that he would
      be indeed welcome, and that his presence would be the greatest of
      all favours. She then began to commune with herself, what this
      might import, that so great a king should come to visit her in her
      husband's absence, nor was she so deluded as not to surmise that it
      was the fame of her beauty that drew him thither.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050010">
   [010]
  </a>
  Nevertheless she
      made ready to do him honour in a manner befitting her high degree,
      summoning to her presence such of the retainers as remained in the
      castle, and giving all needful directions with their advice, except that
      the order of the banquet and the choice of the dishes she reserved
      entirely to herself. Then, having caused all the hens that could be
      found in the country-side to be brought with all speed into the castle,
      she bade her cooks furnish forth the royal table with divers dishes
      made exclusively of such fare.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050011">
   [011]
  </a>
  The King arrived on the appointed
      day, and was received by the lady with great and ceremonious cheer.
      Fair and noble and gracious seemed she in the eyes of the King
      beyond all that he had conceived from the knight's words, so that he
      was lost in admiration and inly extolled her to the skies, his passion
      being the more inflamed in proportion as he found the lady surpass
      the idea which he had formed of her.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050012">
   [012]
  </a>
  A suite of rooms furnished
      with all the appointments befitting the reception of so great a king,
      was placed at his disposal, and after a little rest, breakfast-time being
      come, he and the Marchioness took their places at the same table,
  while his suite were honourably entertained at other boards according
      to their several qualities.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050013">
   [013]
  </a>
  Many courses were served with no lack
      of excellent and rare wines, whereby the King was mightily pleased,
      as also by the extraordinary beauty of the Marchioness, on whom his
      eye from time to time rested. However, as course followed course,
      the King observed with some surprise, that, though the dishes were
      diverse, yet they were all but variations of one and the same fare, to
      wit, the pullet.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050014">
   [014]
  </a>
  Besides which he knew that the domain was one
      which could not but afford plenty of divers sorts of game, and by
      forewarning the lady of his approach, he had allowed time for hunting;
      yet, for all his surprise, he would not broach the question more
      directly with her than by a reference to her hens; so, turning to her
      with a smile, he said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madam, do hens grow in this country
	without so much as a single cock?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050015">
   [015]
  </a>
  The Marchioness, who perfectly
      apprehended the drift of the question, saw in it an opportunity,
      sent her by God, of evincing her virtuous resolution; so casting a
      haughty glance upon the King she answered thus:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Sire, no; but
	the women, though they may differ somewhat from others in dress
	and rank, are yet of the same nature here as elsewhere.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050016">
   [016]
  </a>
  The 
      significance of the banquet of pullets was made manifest to the King
      by these words, as also the virtue which they veiled. He perceived
      that on a lady of such a temper words would be wasted, and that
      force was out of the question. Wherefore, yielding to the dictates
      of prudence and honour, he was now as prompt to quench, as he
      had been inconsiderate in conceiving, his unfortunate passion for the
      lady;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0105#p01050017">
   [017]
  </a>
  and fearing her answers, he refrained from further jesting with
      her, and dismissing his hopes devoted himself to his breakfast, which
      done, he disarmed suspicion of the dishonourable purpose of his visit
      by an early departure, and thanking her for the honour she had
      conferred upon him, and commending her to God, took the road to
      Genoa.
 </p>
</div>