---
title: "Novel VI"
day: "nov0706"
layout: "single"
---
<div id="nov0706" type="novella" who="pampinea">
 <h1>
  Novel VI
 </h1>
 <p>
  <h2>
   [Voice: pampinea]
  </h2>
 </p>
 <argument>
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060001" id="p07060001">
    [001]
   </a>
   Madonna Isabella has with her Leonetto, her
accepted lover, when she is surprised by one Messer Lambertuccio, by whom she is beloved:
her husband coming home about the same time, she sends Messer Lambertuccio forth of the
house drawn sword in hand, and the husband afterwards escorts Leonetto
home.
  </p>
 </argument>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="author">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060002" id="p07060002">
    [002]
   </a>
   Wondrous
   was the delight that
	all the company had of Fiammetta's story, nor was there any but affirmed that the lady had
	done excellent well, and dealt with her insensate husband as he deserved.  However, it
	being ended, the king bade Pampinea follow suit; which she did on this wise:
  </p>
 </div3>
 <div3 type="commentary" who="pampinea">
  <p>
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060003" id="p07060003">
    [003]
   </a>
   Not a few there are that in their simplicity aver that Love deranges the mind,
	insomuch that whoso loves becomes as it were witless: the folly of which opinion, albeit I
	doubt it not, and deem it abundantly proven by what has been already said, I purpose once
	again to demonstrate.
  </p>
 </div3>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060004" id="p07060004">
   [004]
  </a>
  In our city, rich in all manner of good things, there dwelt a
young gentlewoman, fair exceedingly, and wedded to a most worthy and excellent
gentleman.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060005" id="p07060005">
   [005]
  </a>
  And as it not seldom happens that one cannot keep ever to the same
diet, but would fain at times vary it, so this lady, finding her husband not altogether to
her mind, became enamoured of a gallant, Leonetto by name, who, though of no high rank,
was not a little debonair and courteous, and he in like manner
fell in love with her; and (as you know that 'tis seldom that what is
mutually desired fails to come about) 'twas not long before they had
fruition of their love.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060006" id="p07060006">
   [006]
  </a>
  Now the lady being, as I said, fair and winsome,
it so befell that a gentleman, Messer Lambertuccio by name, grew mightily enamoured of
her, but so tiresome and odious did she
  find him, that for the world she could
not bring herself to love him.  So, growing tired of fruitlessly soliciting her favour by
ambassage, Messer Lambertuccio, who was a powerful signior, sent her at last another sort
of message in which he threatened to defame her if she complied not with his
wishes. Wherefore the lady, knowing her man, was terrified, and disposed herself to
pleasure him.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060007" id="p07060007">
   [007]
  </a>
  Now it so chanced that Madonna Isabella, for such was the lady's
name, being gone, as is our Florentine custom in the summer, to spend some time on a very
goodly estate that she had in the contado, one morning finding herself alone, for her
husband had ridden off to tarry some days elsewhere, she sent for Leonetto to come and
keep her company; and Leonetto came forthwith in high glee.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060008" id="p07060008">
   [008]
  </a>
  But while they were
together, Messer Lambertuccio, who, having got wind that the husband was away, had mounted
his horse and ridden thither quite alone, knocked at the door.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060009" id="p07060009">
   [009]
  </a>
  Whereupon the
lady's maid hied her forthwith to her mistress, who was alone with Leonetto, and called
her, saying:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madam, Messer Lambertuccio is here below, quite alone.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060010" id="p07060010">
   [010]
  </a>
  Whereat the lady was vexed beyond measure; and being also not a little
dismayed, she said to Leonetto:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Prithee, let it not irk thee to withdraw behind the
curtain, and there keep close until Messer Lambertuccio be gone.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060011" id="p07060011">
   [011]
  </a>
  Leonetto,
who stood in no less fear of Messer Lambertuccio than did the lady, got into his
hiding-place; and the lady bade the maid go open to Messer Lambertuccio: she did so; and
having dismounted and fastened his palfrey to a pin, he ascended the stairs;
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060012" id="p07060012">
   [012]
  </a>
  at
the head of which the lady received him with a smile and as gladsomea greeting as she
could find words for, and asked him on what errand he was come.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060013" id="p07060013">
   [013]
  </a>
  The gentleman
embraced and kissed her, saying:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   My soul, I am informed that your husband is not here,
and therefore I am come to stay a while with you.
  </q>
  Which said, they went into the room,
and locked them in, and Messer Lambertuccio fell a toying with her.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060014" id="p07060014">
   [014]
  </a>
  Now, while thus
he sped the time with her, it befell that the lady's husband, albeit she nowise expected
him, came home, and, as he drew nigh the palace, was observed by the maid, who forthwith
ran to the lady's chamber, and said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Madam, the master will be here anon; I doubt he is
already in the courtyard.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060015" id="p07060015">
   [015]
  </a>
  Whereupon, for that she had two men in the house,
and the knight's palfrey, that was in the courtyard, made it impossible to hide him, the
lady gave
  herself up for dead. Nevertheless she made up her mind on the spur
of the moment, and springing out of bed:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Sir,
  </q>
  quoth she to Messer Lambertuccio,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   if you have any regard for me, and would save my life, you will do as I bid you:
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060016" id="p07060016">
    [016]
   </a>
   that is to say, you will draw your blade, and put on a fell and wrathful
countenance, and hie you downstairs, saying: 'By God, he shall not escape me elsewhere.'
And if my husband would stop you, or ask you aught, say nought but what I have told you,
and get you on horseback and tarry with him on no account.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060017" id="p07060017">
   [017]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   To hear is to
obey,
  </q>
  quoth Messer Lambertuccio, who, with the flush of his recent exertion and the
rage that he felt at the husband's return still on his face, and drawn sword in hand, did
as she bade him. The lady's husband, being now dismounted in the courtyard, and not a
little surprised to see the palfrey there, was about to go up the stairs, when he saw
Messer Lambertuccio coming down them, and marvelling both at his words and at
his mien:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   What means this, Sir?
  </q>
  quoth he.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060018" id="p07060018">
   [018]
  </a>
  But Messer Lambertuccio
clapped foot in stirrup, and mounted, saying nought but:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Zounds, but I will meet him
elsewhere;
  </q>
  and so he rode off.
 </p>
 <p>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060019" id="p07060019">
   [019]
  </a>
  The gentleman then ascended the stairs, at the
head of which he found his lady distraught with terror, to whom he said:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   What manner of
thing is this? After whom goes Messer Lambertuccio, so wrathful and menacing?
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060020" id="p07060020">
   [020]
  </a>
  Whereto the lady, drawing nigher the room, that Leonetto might hear her, made
answer:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Never, Sir, had I such a fright as this. There came running in here a young
man, who to me is quite a stranger, and at his heels Messer Lambertuccio with a drawn
sword in his hand; and as it happened the young man found the door of this room open, and
trembling in every limb, cried out: 'Madam, your succour, for God's sake, that I die not
in your arms.'
   <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060021" id="p07060021">
    [021]
   </a>
   So up I got, and would have asked him who he was, and how
bested, when up came Messer Lambertuccio, exclaiming: 'Where art thou, traitor?' I planted
myself in the doorway, and kept him from entering, and seeing that I was not minded to
give him admittance, he was courteous enough, after not a little parley, to take himself
off, as you saw.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060022" id="p07060022">
   [022]
  </a>
  Whereupon:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Wife,
  </q>
  quoth the husband,
  <q direct="unspecified">
   thou didst very right. Great indeed had been the
scandal, had some one been slain here, and 'twas a gross affront on Messer Lambertuccio's
part to pursue a fugitive within the house.
  </q>
  He then asked where the young man
was.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060023" id="p07060023">
   [023]
  </a>
  Whereto
  the lady answered:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Nay, where he may be hiding,
Sir, I wot not.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060024" id="p07060024">
   [024]
  </a>
  So:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Where art thou?
  </q>
  quoth the knight.
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Fear not to
shew thyself.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060025" id="p07060025">
   [025]
  </a>
  Then forth of his hiding-place, all of a tremble, for in
truth he had been thoroughly terrified, crept Leonetto, who had heard all that had passed.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060026" id="p07060026">
   [026]
  </a>
  To whom:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   What hast thou to do with Messer Lambertuccio?
  </q>
  quoth the
knight.
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060027" id="p07060027">
   [027]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Nothing in the world,
  </q>
  replied the young man:
  <q direct="unspecified">
   wherefore, I
doubt he must either be out of his mind, or have mistaken me for another; for no sooner
had he sight of me in the street hard by the palace, than he laid his hand on his sword,
and exclaimed: 'Traitor, thou art a dead man.'  Whereupon I sought not to know why,but
fled with all speed, and got me here, and so, thanks to God and this gentlewoman, I
escaped his hands.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060028" id="p07060028">
   [028]
  </a>
  <q direct="unspecified">
   Now away with thy fears,
  </q>
  quoth the knight;
  <q direct="unspecified">
   I
will see thee home safe and sound; and then 'twill be for thee to
determine how thou shalt deal with him.
  </q>
  <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}itDecameron/nov0706#p07060029" id="p07060029">
   [029]
  </a>
  And so, when they had supped, he
set him on horseback, and escorted him to Florence, and left him not until he was safe in
his own house. And the very same evening, following the lady's instructions, Leonetto
spoke privily with Messer Lambertuccio, and so composed the affair with him, that, though
it occasioned not a little talk, the knight never wist how he had been tricked by his
wife.
 </p>
</div>